 MongoDB is a 'document oriented' or 'NOSQL' database. Document oriented databases have many advantages over more traditional relational databases, including high performance and much simpler scalability. Many developers also like its schema-less nature, allowing the app to add fields to records as needed.

It is important to understand, however, that MongoDB is _not_ a replacement for relational DBs. Relational DB maintain the advantage of much more powerful queries- especially when it comes to complex relations.

With that said, we'll leave it to the MongoDB folks to explain [how to set up MongoDB itself](http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Getting+Started).

Steps for installing the PHP driver depend on your OS.

##For *NIX: 
For MongoDB + PHP goodness, you'll need the Mongo PECL module. For most *NIX systems, this is as easy as:

	sudo pecl install mongo

Now add the following line to your php.ini:

Add the following line to your php.ini:

	extension=mongo.so

That's it! You're done!

##For Windows:

The precompiled driver is available for the following setups:
VC8 and VC9

Builds for each release are available on Github. They are all build for PHP 5.3, as PHP 5.2 is no longer supported with VC9.

Binaries for the latest code are also available:

    * VC8 Thread-Safe
    * VC8 Non-Thread-Safe
    * VC9 Thread-Safe
    * VC9 Non-Thread-Safe

VC6

The latest binaries for 5.2 and 5.3 are available at php.net.

Please inquire on the mailing list if you need a different build.
Install

1. Download and extract the .zip file. Make sure PHP version_ matches the version of PHP you are running (e.g., if you are running PHP 5.2.6, download the driver for PHP 5.2).
2. Copy php_mongo.dll to your PHP extensions directory (see "extension_dir" in php.ini).
3.Add the following line to your php.ini:

extension=php_mongo.dll

For more information about using MongoDB, take a look at [MongoDB Quickstart](http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Quickstart).

For more information about installing MongoDB alongside PHP, refer to http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Installing+the+PHP+Driver