## Setting Up Your Environment

In this tutorial we'll be using:

* HTTP Server (Apache + mod_rewrite recommended for this tutorial)
* PHP 5.3.0 or higher
* One of the following databases: CouchDB, MongoDB, MySQL, or SQLite. Don't worry about the database for now- we'll get to that later in the tutorial.

You can try deploying the blog on a different HTTP server, but you're on your own here.

PHP 5.3 is a hard requirement for Li3. You'll see that this is a good thing as you build your blog.

Now for the moment you've been waiting for- let's get a fresh copy of Lithium. You have 2 options:

1) Download the latest version from http://rad-dev.org/lithium/versions. For security reasons, it's best to extract the Li3 archive in a directory outside of the web root folder. We'll get in to more detail on this later.

2) Use Git to clone the latest version from the Li3 repository: http://rad-dev.org/lithium/wiki/guides/installation. This is the best option for getting the latest and greatest version, or if you plan to contribute code and/or documentation yourself. Check out (pun intended?) our [Git setup guide](http://rad-dev.org/lithium/wiki/drafts/wllm/tutorial/Git_Setup) to set up your Git installation for Lithium.

Now you should make sure your HTTP server is on board. Here's a guide to get Apache serving your Lithium application in no time: [http://rad-dev.org/lithium/wiki/drafts/wllm/tutorial/Apache_Setup](http://rad-dev.org/lithium/wiki/drafts/wllm/tutorial/Apache_Setup).

Just to make sure any errors you might run aren't quietly eaten, make sure the following line are in your php.ini file:

```
error_reporting  =  E_ALL
display_errors   =  true
```

If you're now serving up the Lithium welcome page, you have a platform to deploy your blog on.

Finally, to make it easier to access the Lithium RAD tool from anywhere on your file system, you should the executable to your system path. For *NIX systems running bash, you can do this by adding the following line to your .profile file:

```
PATH=$PATH:_your Lithium directory_/libraries/lithium/console
```

For Windows, you can simply add it after a semicolon to the _Path_ variable in the System properties dialog.

If you can run the _li3_ command from your command line, you're ready to start developing your blog application.




