#Lithium on Internet Information Services (IIS)

##About IIS
IIS Is a microsoft-supplied product which manages many internet services, one of them being HTTPD and comes standard on most windows machines.

##Obtaining IIS
To install IIS under windows you need to go to add/remove programs in your control panel. After entering the add/remove programs window you need to click "Turn Windows features on or off" and locate the following:

- Internet Information Services
- Internet Information Services Hostable Web Core

For a quick setup you can check both of those, if you want to remove specific features you can expand "Intener Information Services" and remove unwanted features.

Once this is done you can now locate IIS within your start menu or find it through search simply by typing IIS

##Perparations
To make IIS work you must install the URL Rewrite extension located on the [a http://www.iis.net/download/URLRewrite](iis.net website - http://www.iis.net/download/URLRewrite) and follow the proper installation instructions located there.

Setup PHP for IIS - [a http://php.iis.net/](http://php.iis.net/)
- IIS 6.0 - [a http://learn.iis.net/page.aspx/247/using-fastcgi-to-host-php-applications-on-iis-60/](http://learn.iis.net/page.aspx/247/using-fastcgi-to-host-php-applications-on-iis-60/)
- IIS 7.0 - [a http://learn.iis.net/page.aspx/246/using-fastcgi-to-host-php-applications-on-iis-7/](http://learn.iis.net/page.aspx/246/using-fastcgi-to-host-php-applications-on-iis-7/)

Setup a site by right clicking **Sites** and click **Add Web Site**
1. Enter your website name
2. Enter the physical path to your *\path\to\lithium\app\webroot*
3. (Optional) - If your content is in your home directory or a subdirectory of that, click **Connect As** and click **Specific User**. From there enter your windows login details, this will allow IIS to have proper access to the application.
4. Enter the desired port
5. Click "**Ok**"

##Adding Rewrite Rules to IIS
1. Locate your site in the **Sites** tree and click it.
2. Locate the URL Rewrite icon from the extension installed earlier.
3. On the right hand side under "**Inbound Rules**" click "**Import Rules**"
4. Click the Ellipsis (...) next to the field box and locate the .htaccess file within your *\path\to\lithium\app\webroot\* directory and select it
5. Click "**Import**"
6. On the right hand side click "**Apply**"

After doing this you should now be able to use your site with lithium. 

##Notes
This has only been tested with IIS7 (which is shipped with Windows 7)

