# Lithium QA

## Requirements

The application's _master_ branch always requires the last stable release of Lithium.

## Installation

This project makes use of git submodules. In order to install, execute the following commands from the console. Please note that components of _Lithium QA_ interact with the VCS of your project. Currently only GIT is supported a such. 

{{{
cd ~
git clone git://github.com/UnionOfRAD/lithium_qa.git
cd lithium_qa
git submodule update --init
}}}

## Syntax Command

Files can be syntax checked using the `Syntax` command which comes with the application. The command utilizes [PHPca ](http://github.com/spriebsch/phpca/) to check the syntax of PHP files against a set of rules. These rules are based upon the [Lithium Coding Standards](http://rad-dev.org/lithium/wiki/standards/coding) and the [Lithium Code Documentation Standards](http://rad-dev.org/lithium/wiki/standards/documenting). 

The basic usage is:
{{{
li3 syntax [--metrics] [--blame] PATH
}}}

Here we are checking the whole file tree of our `pet` project:
{{{
cd path/to/lithium_qa
li3 syntax /path/to/pet
}}}

If you want to log the output to a file (and your on *nix) this might come in handy:
{{{
li3 syntax /path/to/pet 2>&1 | tee verify_pet.log
}}}

Blame each failure and show metrics:
{{{
li3 syntax --metrics --blame /path/to/pet
}}}

## GIT Pre Commit Hook

This pre commit hook is based upon the example found in `.git/hooks/pre-commit.sample`. Copy the sample script to `/path/to/project/.git/hooks/pre-commit` and make it executable. Then, replace the code in the script with the code shown below and adjust the paths to Lithium QA and the li3 command.

{{{
cd /path/to/project
cp .git/hooks/pre-commit.sample .git/hooks/pre-commit
chmod a+x .git/hooks/pre-commit
}}}

* add the following code to `.git/hooks/pre-commit`
* adjust the `LITHIUM_QA` and `LI3` values

{{{#!/bin/sh
 
LITHIUM_QA=/path/to/lithium_qa
LI3=/path/to/lithium/libraries/lithium/console/li3

if git-rev-parse --verify HEAD >/dev/null 2>&1
then
    AGAINST=HEAD
else
    # Initial commit: diff against an empty tree object
    AGAINST=4b825dc642cb6eb9a060e54bf8d69288fbee4904
fi

EXIT_STATUS=0
PROJECT=`pwd`

for FILE in `git diff-index --cached --name-only --diff-filter=AM ${AGAINST}`
do
    cd ${LITHIUM_QA} && ${LI3} syntax ${PROJECT}/${FILE}
    test $? != 0 && EXIT_STATUS=1
done

exit ${EXIT_STATUS}

}}}

Now when committing each file the syntax is checked. The commit is aborted if a check failed. If you don't want to have the hook run on commit pass the `--no-verify` option to `git commit`.


### Covered Command

Allows for checking if classes in a given library all have corresponding tests according to the Lithium standard. Also prints out coverage percentage.

{{{
li3 covered /path/to/library
}}}

Will output something similar to the following.
{{{
  has test |  95.00% | lithium\util\Collection
  has test |  97.98% | lithium\util\Inflector
  has test | 100.00% | lithium\util\collection\Filters
  has test |     n/a | lithium\test\Controller
  has test |  95.24% | lithium\test\Dispatcher
   no test |     n/a | lithium\test\Filter
}}}
